Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in this video we're
going to look at another classical theorem from
Antiquity concerned with cyclic quadrilaterals
and I want to give you a fresh modern viewpoint
on this theorem that's due to tmy but I also
want to uh use this opportunity to expand our
thinking geometry wise so part of what I'm trying
to do here is explain to you that when we let go
of the real number dreaming and concentrate on
a logical clear presentation with the rational
numbers firmly in the center of the story then
various new possibilities open up for us and I
want to demonstrate that today by first of all
talking about this theorem and then seeing how
we can generalize it to the situation of
so-called finite Fields okay so this is
really a big extension of geometry and also to
a certain non- ukian kind of geometry that's
associated with Albert Einstein and the theory of
relativity turns out that toames theorem Works in
much more generality than is usually understood
okay so Claudius toy who lived from 90 to 160
ad in Alexandria this was the Roman period the
Romans had basically taken over Alexandria this
time and he was a very influential astronomer
writing one of the standard treatises called
the alist on classical astronomy there's also a
geographer and of course a mathematician and today
we're interested in the following theorum that he
discovered about a cyclic quadrilateral so it's
the same kind of situation as in brahmagupta's
Formula we have a quadrilateral AB c d which is
inscribed in a circle and brahmagupta's formula
had to do with the area of such a thing and the
relation of that area to the length of the
four sides sort of around the outside of the
quadrilateral Tommy's theorem does not concern
itself with area but rather just with lengths
but it's not just the lengths a b c d around
the outside that are involved also the lengths
of the two diagonals so I remind you that if
you have four points in the plane then there
are Al together six line segments joining those
four points in all possible ways just like here
so there are really six lengths determined by
these four points of the cyclic quadrilateral
okay so in terms of a b c d those lengths there
and the diagonal lengths p and Q toes theorem says
that the product of a * C so this length times
this length plus b * D the product of the other
two opposite lengths on the outside this sum
equals the product of the diagonal lengths
P * Q it's a very elegant beautiful classical
theorem and actually we should be a little
bit more careful the theorem really does need
convexity so if we look at a non-convex polygon
that's still cyclic well we have to adjust the
relative positions of these uh three products
Tommy uh used this theorem prominently in making
up tables of chords sort of Elementary primitive
trigonometric tables that uh were very important
for astronomical calculation so this was actually
quite a important practical uh tool in the hands
of toy okay so that's uh that's very good but from
our point of view there is a serious flaw because
it involves these lengths and in the plane the
theory of lengths requires a theory of square
roots and the theory of square roots involves
infinite processes and we're not willing to agree
that that those are well-defined mathematical
objects we can talk about a process going on
and on but we're not going to accept that we
can finish such an infinite process and then
present ourselves with a number which is the
result of this infinite process which has run
forever and forever and forever okay so we
don't have theory of square roots we don't have
a theory of underlying real numbers so there's
essentially something problematic with this
formulation even though it corresponds very
easily to our physical intuition and get a ruler
out and measure these lengths approximately so
at the level of Applied Mathematics this is fine
it's in fact it's very interesting and useful but
at the level of pure mathematics unfortunately
it needs to be brought into a more focused and
logical framework and that's what we're going to
do today The Logical difficulties with a standard
formulation of TM theorem are not just a matter
of opinion it's something that you can see very
clearly by looking at examples this is invariably
the case that when you look at examples and The
Logical flaws start to reveal themselves so
let's have a look at an example to illustrate
the difficulties let's take a cyclic quadrilateral
in fact let's take one that we've already talked
about so that we are familiar with the various um
quadrant is and distances involved so we're going
to take the points A1 which is 1 Z A2 which
is 3 fths 4 fths A3 which is - 1213 513 and
A4 down here which is 1517 and - 8 over 17 okay
we've talked about this quadrilateral before and
we've calculated before each one of these quadrant
so these are now quadrants the quadrants q12 the
quadrants between these two points is 4 fth and
I remind you that that's the difference between
the x coordinates squared plus the difference in
the y-coordinates squared with no square roots or
anything else just that algebraic combination
so q12 is 45s q23 is 162 over 65 q34 is 882
over 221 q14 is 4 over 17 and the diagonal
quadrants is our q24 which is 144 over 85
and Q13 which is 50 over 13 now tmy theorem does
not involve the quadres it involves the distances
or the lengths which are just the square roots
of these things so Tommy's theorem states that
if you take the length of this segment which was
the square root of 4 fths and you multiplied by
the length of this one which is the square root of
that one there that's the first product and then
you add the length between 2 3 times the length
between 1 4 so you have to take the square root
of this one and the square root of that one add
that to this then you should get the uh product
of the diagonal lengths so the square root of this
one times the square root of this one this is the
statement of tm's theorem so let's see what's
involved with actually verifying that this is
actually true well first of all there's a lot of
computation ahead of us because each one of these
square roots involves an infinite amount of work
we have to run our computer forever and ever and
ever to get even one of these square roots in its
entirety so it's a kind of a dreaming it's a kind
of a fantasy so we have to perform this Fantasy 1
two 3 4 5 six times for each one of these square
roots and then we have to take products we have
to take the product of this infinite decimal
that we've ostensibly created times this infinite
decimal and then we take the product of these two
and we take the product of these two and then we
have to take the sum of this one with this one and
finally we have to compare that big infinite
decimal with this one so all together there
are six + 3 + 2 + 1 = 12 infinite computations of
course this is is some kind of fantasy calculation
because in fact we can't do an infinite number
of computations never could never will be able
to what our computers are actually capable
of doing is finding approximations so on my
computer I have a certain setting for accuracy for
example maybe I'm asking my computer to calculate
up to six decimal places okay so I can do that
then I can calculate each one of these things
up to six decimal places and then I can form the
product up to six decimal places and then I can
form the sum up to six decimal places and then I
can look at the left hand side and the right hand
side and you can do this on your computer too all
right what I get is that the left hand side will
be this whole thing after I've done those various
steps is 2.55 2613 approximately while the right
hand side is 2.55 2614 approximately so we are
verifying that indeed the left hand side and the
right hand side are pretty close are these things
in fact exactly equal we haven't been able to
demonstrate that using real number arithmetic it's
very hard to completely demonstrate a statement
like this that's just the reality of it which is
why most classical texts don't try to illustrate
these theorems even even though they're very
computationally oriented they try to avoid
actually giving you explicit examples because you
end up mired in these infinite calculations which
you actually can't do but just have to pretend
that you can do them all right so this is like
standard standard story so you get so used to
having theorems presented without any examples
that you just end up thinking well that's just
the way modern mathematics is but it's not the way
modern mathematics is it's just the way we happen
to have misunderstood the way mathematics really
is so how do we proceed in a more rational logical
way okay so the challenge is how are we going to
convert TM theorem which is originally expressed
in terms of distances and maybe I will write the
distances in terms of the various points that the
distances are between so instead of writing a b
and c and d and so on I'll write D12 for the
distance between point number one and point
number two and so on all right so this is the
standard form of Tommy theorem and the question
is how are we going to convert that into a
relation about the quadrants is Qi J which
are in fact the squares of these distances well
actually the reality is that the distances are
the square roots of the quadrants right the
quadrant is actually come first and then you
end up approximating these square roots to get
the distances so we want to convert this how
do we do it so the answer is to use the theorem on
slide two of math foundations 124 and that theorem
connected the triple quad formula with a linear
relationship so basically it said that if you have
a linear relationship between three things for
example X Plus yal Z and then you're interested
in the relationship between the squar of those
three things you're interested in x^2 y^2 and z
s and what is the relationship between those three
squares the answer is they satisfy the triple quad
formula I remind you that the Archimedes
function a of XY Z is defined by x + y + z - 2
x^2 + y^2 + z^ 2 and an alternate asymmetrical
form foration 4X y - x + y - z^ 2 the triple quad
formula says that a of the three quadrants
is formed by three points on a line is
zero okay so how do we apply that to tmes
theorem well we get this rational version
pretty well immediately that if A1 A2
A3 A4 is a cyclic quadrilateral with
quadrants as q i j defined as usual so that
that's Q or the quadrants between Ai and AJ
then Archimedes function appli to the product
q12 q34 and the product q23 * q14 and the product
Q13 * q24 that equals zero so why is that well
it's because these three quantities here are
exactly the squares of these three quantities
here and the fact that these three quantities
in other words this product this product and this
product satisfy a linear relation implies that the
squares of these three quantities will satisfy the
triple quad formula in other words when we apply
Archimedes function to them we're going at zero so
in fact it's very simple in this case to convert
from the classical tmes theorem to this purely
algebraic form the price you pay is that you go
up and degree a little bit because this thing is
quadratic instead of having a linear relationship
amongst the square roots you have a quadratic
relationship amongst the objects themselves you
might think I think this is more work but it's
not true at all this is far less work because
you're avoiding the pain and suffering involved
in trying to get those infinite square roots so
what about a proof because we want to have
an independent proof of this theorem that's
independent of any of the proofs of to theorem
it turns out that the classical tomm theorem is
a little bit subtle and if you look at various
proofs of it you find that there are certain
points where things are a little bit um perhaps a
little bit dodgy and the reason is because of this
convexity issue and the fact that the ordering
of points ends up mattering and it's sometimes a
little bit awkward to specify this appropriate
ordering when you know you have to rely on a
picture or something like that to do so so the the
classical proofs are not entirely straightforward
we're going to see on the other hand that
this algebraic version this rational version
has a very lovely and completely uh
straightforward and unambiguous proof
we'll start with the unit circle because we
have a lot of control over the unit circle so
we're going to suppose that our circle is the
unit circle and we're supposing that our four
points are controlled by projective coordinates
so we have parameterizations UI TI for each of
these points and explicitly that means that the
point AI is ui^ 2 - ti^ 2 over ui^ 2 + ti^ 2 and
2 * UI TI over ui^ 2 + ti^ 2 where I runs from 1
to 4 so we have these four explicit points that
depend on these projective uh parameters okay
then the unit circle quadrants theorem told us
how to write down the quadrants between two such
points Qi J in terms of the four numbers involved
is exactly this expression 4 * UI tjus UJ TI 2 /
UI s + TI i^ 2 * uj^ 2 + tj^ 2 all right so the
kind of product that's involved in our version of
TM theorem something like q12 * q34 well that'll
just be the product of two such things so there'll
be a 16 and then there'll be a U1 T2 minus U2 T1 2
from this one and there's the denominator coming
from this one and then there's a numerator coming
from this one u3 T4 minus u4 T3 2 and then the
denominator uh formates as well so just two of
these quadrants is multiplied together this is
the kind of expression that we're getting and
there's similar ones for q23 q14 and Q13 q24
and what's the difference between this one and
these ones well the 16 will be common to all
of them and the numerators will be different
for this one and for this one so here the
numerators will have a U2 T3 and so on and
here a U1 T4 and so on but the denominators
will be exactly the same as here in all of
these three cases the denominator looks exactly
the same it's the product of all four of these
quadrant okay that's an important observation
that these three numbers which are the things
we're going to stick into the Archimedes function
have all the same denominator and they all have
this 16 Factor they really only differ in these
um numerator terms so now what we're trying to
prove Pro is that this relation holds that's what
we're trying to prove and because of the remark
that we've just made and because of the fact that
this Archimedes function is homogeneous all of the
terms are quadratic it means that this is actually
equivalent to a simpler statement because the
denominators that are appearing here are appearing
in all of the terms and so they come out uniformly
and the factor of 16 that's appearing in all
of these also appears in all of the terms in
the Archimedes function so it comes out as well
so we can get rid of those because we're setting
everything to zero and so the essence of this
formula comes down to proving that a of the
product of these two factors and the product of
these two factors and the product of these two
factors plug that into Archimedes function we get
zero these are the numerators of of this this and
this okay so we could get our computer then to
just take these three terms and apply Archimedes
function and simplify to get zero and that's
perfectly legitimate but it turns out that in this
case there's a slightly more insightful reason
that actually avoids most of that calculation
so we observe that what's inside here each one of
these terms is actually a square it's actually a
square and if we go back to that same theorem
that we started with the relation that if you
have relation x + y = Zed then you have the U
the relation a of X2 y^2 Z2 equal 0 so we can
establish this relation by establishing a linear
relation between these terms without the squares
so if I take this product here and I write it down
here and I take this product here and I write it
down here without the squares and I take this
product here and I write it down here without
the squares then it turns out that this plus this
equals this this is an independent identity one of
those lovely examples of some remarkable and
beautiful identity sort of coming to our Aid
miraculously sort of a further indication that
we're doing things in the right way okay so I'll
leave it to you as an exercise to expand this
this is very easy identity relatively speaking
to verify because there's just a little bit
of multiplication and expansion going on here
okay so once we've verified that this plus this
equals this then that linear relation between
these three things implies that Archimedes
function applied to the squares of these
three things equal zero so this
is actually a consequence of this
simpler linear identity between these three
quadratic expressions or actually quartic
Expressions so that establishes tm's theorem
in this rational version for the unit circle
okay so then for a general Circle we
proceed in the same uh way that we did
with Brahma gupta's formula in our last
video multiplication by a fixed complex
number a multiplies all quadrant is by the same
number Q of a so when we go from a unit circle
to a General Circle we're multiplying
everything by a single fixed complex
number so all of the quadrant is get multiplied by
Q of a and the fact that this thing is homogeneous
means that if you multiply all these quadrant
is by some fixed Factor then it'll still be
true that you have uh zero for the Archimedes
function of those new quadrant and translation
leaves quadrant is unchanged so once you have it
for real circles centered at zero well you can
translate them anywhere you want the quadrants
don't change so tommes theorem is still valid
all right so that's a proof of this rational form
of tmes theorem and and it's well one should say
it's interesting that this is probably really
the first time where this theorem has been laid
out completely correctly without any underlying
ambiguities that people are just pretending are
not there having to do with square roots
and real numbers this is purely in the
context of rational numbers and arithmetic with
addition multiplication subtraction and Division
that rational algebraic aspect has a lot of
advantages we gain so much by having converted
this theorem into a purely algebraic statement
and I want to explain some of the consequences
of that uh to you but before we do that let's
have a look at an example let's have a look at
the same example that we've already looked at from
this now more enlightened rational point of view
so here are the four points that we've already
considered in our earlier example here are the
quadrant is yet again that we've written down
already tmes theorem in this rational form claims
that the Archimedes function applied to q12 * q34
q23 * q14 and Q13 * q24 namely a of 45s * 882 over
221 and 162 over 65 * 4 17 and 5050 over 13 *
144 85 and you evaluate Archimedes function on
those three numbers and you get zero and that's
something that you can verify even by hand but
your computer of course can do it very simply and
you get zero exactly there's no ambiguity at all
we don't need to rely on floating Point arithmetic
this is a completely 100% full integer Precision
calculation so we have complete confidence that
we have verified tm's theorem in this special
case note that with this rational form of tmes
theorem the three quantities that are appearing
here appear symmetrically in Tommy's theorem
it was a case of this product plus this product
equals this product but here the Archimedes
function say quad formula story uh is symmetric
in its three variables so uh the convexity of the
cyclic quadrilateral is no longer required that
was a sort of a condition that you actually needed
to get it working correctly in the classical case
and here we don't care where the four points
are they can be anywhere they want to be and
the quadrilateral can look how it likes it's
purely algebraic it's the usual story that the
algebra doesn't really care about the order of
things and uh so it covers all the situations
it's another advantage that we get sort of for
free of course we have to pay a little price
because we have to go up a little bit in degree
this is a quadratic relation rather than a linear
one but the advantage is far outway that slight uh
complication one of the very lovely consequences
of this point of view of putting the rational
numbers firmly in the heart of mathematics is
that we start to understand that many of the
situations that formerly we've been looking at
in a very rather narrow way actually extend
in many new directions I want to illustrate
that here with this toames theorem by showing you
how it actually naturally extends to a so-called
finite field so this is a domain of arithmetic
which is a lot like rational number arithmetic
except that it's much smaller in fact it's only
finite set of elements with some multiplication
and addition and subtraction and division so
the the the entire theory of finite Fields is
something that we will talk about at that length
and we'll lay it out uh logically and carefully
and so on so this is sort of a motivation for that
and and also a bit of an introduction to thinking
about a finite field it's actually quite easy so
informally the arithmetic in F7 we're going to
use just this one example which is illustrative
of generally what goes on the important thing is
that seven is a prime number okay so we could do
the same thing for any prime number like 11 or
13 or 19 or any Prime any big Prime you like
to choose so we'll choose seven okay so what
does arithmetic in F7 look like well the simplest
way of thinking about this is that it's just like
the arithmetic in the rational numbers exactly the
same except for one caveat the distinction is that
there's a new relation the new relation is that
7 equals 0 seven is now zero so any multiple of
seven also vanishes me if 7 is zero then 7 + 7 is
also 0 so 14 is z any multiple of s is zero and
otherwise the rules of arithmetic are essentially
exactly the same as they are for rational numbers
so let me illustrate suppose we have 12 over
17 we can simplify that because whenever we
see seven we can just get rid of it so we can
rewrite the 12 as 7 + 5 we can rewrite the 17
as 14 + 3 this seven and that 14 are in fact
zero in this new domain that we're working
in so this thing simplifies to 5 over3 so
in F7 12 over 17 is the same as 5 over3
how about a bigger example 356 over 95 well
if we judiciously write this as 350 + 6 noting
that 350 is a multiple of 7 and we write this
as 91 + 4 because 91 is a multiple of 7 then
these multiples of seven immediately disappear
because they're equal to zero and we just get
6 over 4 which is 3 over2 as usual how about
uh 1 half this is a little bit of a trick here
so 1/2 we can multiply top and bottom by four why
might we want to do that because when we get this
eight in the denominator if we throw away seven
then eight is just one so 4 over 8 is the same
as 4 over 1 which is four so in F7 a half is the
same as four similarly a third is the same as five
it's basically because 3 * 5 is equal to 1 and
1/ 6 is the same as 6 so because 6 * 6 is equal
to 1 and this means effectively that whenever you
have a denominator as long as it's not zero okay
or a multiple of seven we're not allowed to have
denominators which are multiples of seven because
that's zero and dividing by zero is not allowed
just as it isn't in the rational numbers but
if we have some other denominator then we can
essentially get rid of it by applying a trick
like this let me illustrate this by a a little
bit of an arithmetic calculation so suppose we
want to make this calculation in F7 32 19 * 43
over 101 + 225 * 47 over 11 so let's see if I
can do this so I'm going to simplify all of these
things by just rearranging getting rid of sevens
so 32 has a 28 in it get rid of the 28 that
leaves us with four 19 has a 14 in it get rid
of the 14 that leaves us with 5 43 has a 42 in it
get rid of that leaves us with one 101 okay that
has 98 in it which is a multiple of seven that
leaves us with a three so this thing here is now
much simpler equal to that and 22 over 5 is the
same as 1 over 5 because 22 is the same as 1 47
is the same as five throw it away 42 and 11 is the
same as four okay now we can still do arithmetic
just as usual 4 fths * uh 1/3 is 41 15 and
this thing here the fives cancel and we get 1/4
uh 15 happens to be the same as 1 so
this is the same as 4 over 1 + 1 over4
get everything over common denominator so
that' be 17 over 4 but 17 is the same as
three throw away 14 so we have 3 over 4 and
then what are we going to do well the four
1 over four from here is two so I multiply top
and bottom by two I get 6 over 1 which is six
this is a much simpler arena for arithmetic isn't
it because turns out that pretty well anything
you do can be simplified dramatically Often by
throwing away lots of sevens and pleasantly a
little bit of thought shows that the final answer
that you get can with a bit of judicious getting
rid of denominators always end up being one
of the numbers 0 1 2 3 4 5 or six so there's
really only these seven numbers that are really
different every other number is actually one of
those seven numbers sort of in Disguise perhaps
so that's why it's called a finite field may
look like there's lots of possibilities but in
fact there's really only seven truly distinct
numbers in this story and their arithmetic is
pretty simple in some ways all right so what's
this have to do with geometry and tmy Theorem
so when we're thinking about planer geometry
in this finite setting Things become in fact
remarkably simple in some way because there's
only a finite number of possibilities if there's
only seven possibilities for an x coordinate and
seven possibilities for a y-coordinate then there
are only 49 possible points XY in the plane over
F7 and it turns out rather remarkably that if
you adopt an Al braic approach to Geometry then
many aspects of ukian geometry will have analoges
sometimes very direct analoges in such a finite
situation this is a big world of opportunities
uh so let's just give you a flavor of this in
this kind of example here with tmy theorem
let's look at the unit circle okay which is
given by this equation X2 + y y = 1 we can still
look for the points in the plane that have the
property that x^2 + y^2 = 1 for example this
point 52 5^ SAR is 25 which is the same as 4
and 2^2 is 4 so x^2 + y^2 would be 4 + 4 which
is 8 which is the same as one mod 7 or in F7
so this is a point on the unit circle and in
fact there are eight uh points and I've shown
them uh here in green so let's choose a cyclic
quadrilateral by taking four of these points
say A1 which is the0 01 A2 which is the point
22 A3 which is the point 55 and A4 which is
60 all right we can work and find quadrant is
because the formula for Quadrant is that we've
been using just the difference in x coordinat squ
plus the difference in y-coordinates squared makes
perfect sense in this algebraic setting so for
example q12 the quadrants between these two points
would be the difference in x coordinates squar
that's four plus the difference in y-coordinates
squar that's one so for a total of five while
the quadrants between 2 and three here would be
5 - 2^ 2 + 5 - 2^ 2 so that's 3 2 + 3 2 or 9 + 9
or 18 but working in F7 18 is the same as four so
similarly we can work at all of the quadrants is
and here they are and then we can check that in
fact if we take tm's theorem take the triple quad
function or Archimedes function apply to 5 * 5
that product and then is four time that two and
then this uh 6 * that 6 that if if we apply aredes
function to those three things what do we get 5
* 5 is 25 4 * 2 is 8 6 * 6 is 36 but fortunately
because we're working in F7 we can simplify this
the 25 is the same as four and the 8 is the same
as 1 and the 36 is the same as one so evaluating
this is relatively simple because the numbers are
small we have 4 + 1 + 1 2 - 2 * 4 2 + 1 2 + 1 2
this thing is 6^ squar or 36 here we have 16 17
18 inside * 2 is - 36 yes indeed we do get zero so
toames theorem is verified in this special case of
a cyclic quadrilateral four points on this unit
circle over this finite field and I hope you can
appreciate what a huge opening of a door this
is that the possibility of all those thousands
of ukian geometry theorems that they have analoges
very rich finite concrete analoges that one could
picture on a picture like this not just in the
usual kind of uh situation that's so familiar to
us the possibility emerges that a finite feel like
this is some kind of laboratory for geometrical
investigations because in many ways calculation
here is so simple and actually visualization is
also so simple so enormous possibilities for 21st
century geometry and especially for amateurs to
investigate geometry over finite Fields but you
have to be armed with a strong resolution to
abandon all Wishful dreamings with respect to
infinite processes because infinite processes
certainly are not going to be working in such
a sit situation doesn't make any sense to ask
what's the distance between this point and this
point can we take the square root of of this four
in any reasonable way it doesn't work in this
setting and it just leads to frustration and uh
and sort of complexity you want to stay with the
algebraic setup and if you do that then there's
a very rich uh Theory here which is at least in
small part Illustrated with his tmes theorem here
all right and finally I want to open another very
big door to a whole other world of geometry which
is a kind of a relativistic uh geometry and other
things in that direction so uh we're going to have
just a very brief introduction here to Einstein's
relativistic geometry which I like to call Red
geometry uh in the in the planer setting so the
key difference for us just here because we're only
going to do a very little bit is to think about
replacing our notion of quadrants in the plane
with a slight variant where the quadrants between
two points is not the sum of the squares of the
differences uh in X and Y coordinates but the
difference so we take the difference between the
x coordinates and square it we take the difference
in the y-coordinates and square that and then we
take the difference between these two squares and
we Define that to be the new quadrants we might
call it the red quadrants between these two points
so this turns out to usher in a whole new geometry
which is basically a geometry that was introduced
by by Einstein and some other mathematicians
around that time were also investigating similar
kinds of things okay what happens well one of the
things that happens is that a circle or the unit
circle which we might call x^2 - y^ one doesn't
look like it usually does it's now looking like
a hyperbola okay so in the XY plane as usual this
unit circle with equation x^2 - y^2 = 1 looks like
this hyperbola here so okay we have a unit circle
can we find Four Points on it can we check Tommy's
theorem let's see if it works so we'll choose Four
Points there's four points on this unit circle
notice that both branches are part of the circle
and I'm going to ruce these four points and they
may look kind of familiar I'm basically using
Pythagorean triples just in a sort of a somewhat
different way here so one of the points is 1 Z
right there and here's the point 13 over 12 5
over2 that's on this circle because this squar
minus this squar equals 1 and then over here is
- 5/3 4/3 you can also see a Pythagorean triple
involved there and over here is -7 15 and -
8 15 okay so we have a cyclic quadrilateral
in this relativistic sense we can calculate its
quadrant is so for example q12 is the quadrants
between these two what does that mean well we're
just applying this formula we take the difference
between the x coordinates so that'll be 112th
and square it and then we subtract the difference
between uh these things uh which is 5 12th Square
so that's 25 over 144 so take the difference so
that's -4 over 144 which is - 1 6 notice that we
get a negative quadrants which can happen doesn't
have to be negative but it can be in particular
if you're dead keen on getting a distance out of
this you're going to have some problem because
when you want to take a square root of this uh
it'll be kind of problematic okay so standard
ukian Notions of distance and angle are very
problematic or sort of awkward in this kind of
context and you really don't want to use them it's
much more natural to work with in this algebraic
framework that turns out to be the right way of
thinking about things okay so here are the six
quadrants is and tmes Theorem would assert that
the product of these two quadrants the product of
these two quadrants and the product of these two
quadrants is a quad triple another words if you
apply archimedia function to them you get zero
and you can check that that's exactly what happens
take these six values form these products apply
Archimedes function and you will get zero showing
that TM theorem holds at least in this case so I
hope this is kind of like almost mindblowing to
you that the possibility arises that all of those
hundreds indeed thousands indeed tens of thousands
of theorems of ukian planer geometry might a have
interesting analogs in finite fields and B might
have interesting analoges in relativistic geometri
is like this could even go one step further and
say could even have analoges in relativistic
geometries like this over a finite field okay
so very interesting okay a huge open door here
and it's really something that we we gain by
thinking correctly about things okay so when
you think correctly about things and logically
then you are rewarded doors will open for you
if you don't then the do stay closed and you stay
in the cramped little room and you have to pretend
all this and pretend all that and make a lot of uh
talking okay but when you do mathematics correctly
do open and you can make calculations and you
can verify that the calculations are correct
you don't have to be faking it okay so very very
very important all right we're going to be talking
more about this kind of geometry of course we'll
talk about it more systematic way but I'm hoping
that you're kind of getting oriented in the right
direction here in our next video I want to talk
about a natural question that probably many of you
will have been thinking about because we've been
talking a lot about cyclic quadrilaterals
of various kinds and and formulas for cly
quadrilaterals what about a general quadrilateral
one that's not contained in a circle what are the
corresponding formulas for such a thing are there
any well it turns out that there are but the story
is actually quite interesting historically
so um the name of Brett Schneider uh figures
prominently but there are also some Modern
developments involving some uh people who are
lesser well known so we're going to investigate
some of those analoges um next time in again
this rational setting I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening